#  APPENDIX

## 1\. GENERAL PRINCIPLES:

Opening one bids are wide ranging so responses can be quite weak (5+)

Biddable (\>Jxxx) major suits are preferred to minor suits of the same
length

4441/4414 open 1H; 1444/4144 open 1D; 4-4 in minors open 1C

change of suit is forcing

principle of Fast Arrival (weakest option) in game forcing auctions

preempt style is aggressive in 1<sup>st</sup> and 3<sup>rd</sup>
position NV

in competitive auctions first double by either partner tends to be
take-out

2NT in competitive auctions is rarely natural (either sound raise,
Lebensohl/Rubinsohl or two places to play)

Forcing passes in game forcing sequences or when we have freely bid a
game (to make)

## 2\. CHECKBACK (and related sequences)

a) After a 1NT (bal 11-13pts) rebid *nb. Other sequences similar:*

eg. 1H – 1S 1C-1D-1NT/1C-1H-1NT/1C-1S-1NT

1NT (11-13pts) 1D-1H-1NT/1D-1S-1NT

**2C- invitational checkback** (***possibly weak with diamonds)*** –
FORCES 2D then responder continues:

Pass – weak with diamonds

2S – 5+ card suit, invitational (if opener bids 2NT it is non forcing)

2H – 3 card raise, invitational (if opener bids 2NT it is non forcing)

2NT – natural, invitational

b) After *nb. Other sequences\* similar:*

eg. 1D – 1H *1C-1H-1NT/1C-1S-1NT*

1NT (11-13pts) *1D-1H-1NT/1D/1S-1NT*

**2D- game forcing checkback** – Opener bids the cheapest of;

3 card support (2H)

unbid 4 card major (2S)

5 card suit (3D)

none of above (2NT)

Responder then continues naturally

***\* NOT after 1C-1D-1NT– now 2D is invitational with 6 card suit***

c) After *nb. Other sequences similar:*

eg 1C – 1S 1C-1H-1NT\*/1C-1S-1NT

1NT (11-13pts) 1D-1H-1NT\*/1D-1S-1NT/1H-1S-1NT

**2S- is weak to play** (likely 5 card suit)

**2H- is natural, weak\*** (if response is 1H then 2S now is natural,
forcing)

**3C- natural, invitational**

**3D/3H – 5-5 invitational**

**3S- is GF good suit** (go through 2D with weak suit)

d) After *other sequences similar*

eg. 1D – 1S *1D-1H-1NT/1H/1S/1NT*

1NT (11-13pts) nb. *after 1C opener is ONLY game forcing with support*

**2NT- either weak with clubs (likely 4 spades and 6 clubs) or game
forcing with 5(+) spades and 4 card diamond support .** *-* FORCES 3C
then responder continues;

Pass – weak with clubs

3S– 6-4

3NT- 5422 (4 card diamond support)

3H – Splinter 5431 (4 card diamond support)

3D – Splinter in clubs (4 card diamond support)

e) After jump to 2NT showing 17-18pts bal

eg. 1D – 1S *other similar sequences; 1C-1D/1H/1S-2NT;*

2NT (17-18pts) *1D-1H-2NT; 1H-1S-2NT*

**3C- Checkback (all sequences game forcing) –** Opener shows the lower
of 3 card support (3S); 5 card suit (3D); an unbid 4 card suit (3H) or
bids 3NT with none of these (*so will invariably hold 4 clubs; ie.
2344)* Continuations are natural.

f) After a 2NT rebid (showing 11-13 or 17-18pts bal with only a 4\* card
suit) following a “normal” 2 over 1 response (\*may be poor 5 card)

eg. 1H-2D *other similar sequences; 1D-2C-2NT; 1S-2D/2H-2NT*

2NT *(nb 1H-2C and 1S-2C are not “normal” 2 over 1 sequences)*

**3C- Checkback (all sequences game forcing) –** Opener shows either ANY
17-18pts bal (rebids suit (3H)); 3 (or 4) card support 11-13pts bal
(supports (3D)); 4 clubs 11-13pts bal (bids unbid suit (3S)); with none
of these 11-13pts bal (3NT)

## 3\. REVERSES

At the 2 level these are natural (in principle) showing a good 15+pts
and are forcing to 2NT

eg.

1D – 1S

2H

Responder now bids:

2S – 5+ card suit, forcing (to 3D), tends to deny 3 card support if game
values

2NT – FORCES 3C\* (either weak raise (5-8pts) in one of partners suits;
good support for openers

main suit plus a shortage (\**if openers main suit is clubs only bids 3C
if prepared to play there)*

3D – raise (likely 3 card) with values (9+pts)

3H – raise (4 card) with values (9+pts)

3C – FSF (no other suitable bid).

Opener now continues naturally (nb *a rebid of responders suit (2S) does
NOT promise extra values so openers next bid CAN be passed)*

At the 3 level (or a jump) they are stronger and usually more
distributional and are game forcing.

## 4\. SLAM BIDDING PRINCIPLES:

### a) Cue bidding

Generally 1<sup>st</sup> round controls are shown as a priority although
occasionally this isn’t feasible. If a cue bid is doubled then responder
usually;

Pass – requests further clarification from cue bidder (implies slam
interest)

*(now; RDBL – confirms A; NEW SUIT – second round plus further control;
NT- confirms void)*

RDBL – denies ANY control in the suit and implies little (further)
interest

NEW SUIT – cue bid (usually with a control (first or second round) in
suit Dbled)

If BOTH players have cue bid then 4NT suggests extra values but no
suitable cue bid available

### b) 4NT RKCB

if only one or neither player has cue bid or if a jump then 4NT is RKCB
for agreed (confirmed or by implication) suit.

5C – 1 or 4

5D – 0 or 3

5H – 2 but no Q of trumps

5S – 2 with Q of trumps (*or unexpected extra length)*

5NT – 2 plus an undisclosed void in a higher ranking suit

6 suit – 2 plus an undisclosed void in bid suit

If there is intervention over 4NT then; (DBL/RDBL = 1 or 4; Pass = 0 or
3; next bid = 2)

After the response to RKCB user can bid;

5D (over 5C response and M agreed) – asks for Q trumps

*(5M – no Q, New suit – Q plus extra values; 5NT – Q no extras)*

5NT – asks for specific Ks (excluding trumps)

*(New suit – this K or other two; Trump suit – no K; 6NT- all other Ks)*

NEW SUIT – requesting 3<sup>rd</sup> round control in suit (Grand slam
try)

### c) Other Blackwood variations

Minor suit – in uncontested auctions where a minor has been agreed
(confirmed or by implication) a bid (often a jump) of 4 of the minor is
RKCB with same response style and continuations.

Egs

1C 2C 1D 2D 1C 1H

**4C** 3D **4D** 1S **4C**

Exclusion – a triple jump (*double if it cannot be showing shortage*) in
a new suit asks for aces excluding the suit bid (*next bids show – 0 or
3; 1; 2; 2+Q)*

### d) Trump asking

A jump to 5NT asks for trump holding (top honours)

*Minor agreed – 6m- 0 or 1; 6NT (must be playable)- 1+ extra (J or
length); 7m- 2 or 3*

*Major agreed – 6C- 1+J; 6D- 1+extra length; 6M- 0 or 1; 7M- 2 or 3*

A raise or jump to 5 of an agreed major usually\* asks partner to bid
slam with a better holding than might be expected. (\*occasionally in
“cramped competitive auctions” it requests a control in a suit which
hasn’t been cue bid)

### e) 3NT “Serious” slam try

When a major has been agreed (in a non contested auction) and it is
illogical to play in 3NT (ie a 9 card fit exists (or is likely to
exist)) then 3NT suggests extra values and interest whilst a cue bid is
more limited.

Egs

1NT 2D 1S 2H 1H 2NT

3H **3NT** 3H **3NT** 3D **3NT**

### f) Control asking

In a few certain sequences (eg after a 2D showing 4441) a bid, usually
in a known short suit asks for controls (A=2, K=1). Then responses are;
1<sup>st</sup> step – 0-5; 2<sup>nd</sup> step – 6 etc (if a further ask
is possible it asks for specific Q (ie suit is only that or other two\*;
NT- none; sing suit- all 3\*)

*\*not including singleton*

## 5\. FOURTH SUIT FORCING:

At the 2 level sequences are forcing to 2NT; at the 3 level sequences
are Game Forcing. It is used on hands where no other action is suitable.
Generally these fall into one of the following types;

a) hands with invitational(+) hands with 5 card suit effectively looking
for support

b) hands with invitational(+) balanced hands without an ideal stop

c) hands too strong for other rebids (eg very strong one suiters; strong
support for openers second suit)

d) responder may also have a genuine 2 suiter with the fourth suit

In response opener should define shape and strength.

eg.

1H 1S

2C 2D

2H – usually minimum\* probably 6 hearts but may be 2524 with no other
bid available. \* Since the sequence is forcing to 2NT opener may also
have certain stronger hands (usually with 6+ hearts) which cannot be
described by other bids.

2S – usually minimum\* with 2 spades (Hx) (nb. Would have raised
immediately to 2S after 1H-1S with 3514 minimum). \* Again since the
sequence is forcing to 2NT opener may have considerably stronger hands
which are difficult to describe.

2NT – minimum with diamond stop. Likely 1534/2524 shape. Non forcing

3C- 5-5, forcing

3D\*- natural, non minimum (ie 0544)

3H- non minimum\* with 6 hearts (\* with a very strong hand opener would
start with 2H)

3S- non minimum with 3 spades. Likely 3514 shape.

3NT – non minimum (15-18pts) with diamond stop

\* in some auctions opener can’t have length in the 4th suit. In this
case a raise of the 4<sup>th</sup> suit shows a non minimum usually with
an unsuitable stop for bidding 3NT and tolerance for responders suit.

Responder continues naturally with all bids except 2NT game forcing;

3C – strong support

2/3S – very strong single suiter (possibly 6-4 with fourth suit)

3H – likely Hx support uncertain of best contract

3D – natural, probably 5-5

2/3NT – natural, limited

Other FSF sequences are similar.

## 6\. GAZILLI style sequences

eg 1H-1NT-2C or 1S-1NT-2C

In all these sequences openers 2C rebid can be either :

a) limited (10-16pts) and natural (5M-4+C) or

b) stronger (16+pts) hands (any 5-4+; very strong single suited)

c) after a 1H opener medium strength (14-17pts) spade reverse (*or
possibly 4441/4414 shapes)*

Responders next bid effectively defines the auctions

1H – 1NT

2C **2D- ALL 9+pts hand (except 3 card raise, 10-11pts)– *sequences are
now game forcing if opener has either type b) and forcing to 2NT if he
has type c)***

opener rebids:

2H- 5H-4C 10-13pts (NON-FORCING) Responder passes if minimum; 3C- to
play;

3D- natural 5 card suit; 2NT- natural, invit.

3H- Hx 11-12pts; 3S- good raise in clubs

2S – 14-17pts either 5-4 or 4441/4414 Responder continues: 2NT- minimum
no fit

(FORCING to 2NT) *(opener should now bid 3C/3D min 4414/4441*

*3H/3S max 4414/4441 3NT/pass max/min 5-4)*

2NT- 5H-4+C 14-15pts, INVITATIONAL Responder bids; pass/3C/3H/3NT- to
play;

3D- nat 5 card suit non min, 3S- club fit

3C/3D- nat 5-4 16+pts, GAME FORCING Natural continuations

3H- strong single suiter, GAME FORCING Responder bids naturally (New
suit- cue bid)

***ALL OTHER REBIDS BY RESPONDER SHOW 5-9pts (except raise to 3H):***

2H- 5-8/7pts 2/3 hearts opener continues: 2S- 4414/4441 14-15 *(2NT*

*asks for minor);* 3C/3D- 16+ 5-4; 3H- strong

single suiter; 2NT- 4414/4441 16-17

(*responder bids minor);*

2S- 5-8pts short hearts, 3 spades, both minors opener bids: pass/3C/3NT-
to play; 3D/3H- very strong; 2NT- puppet to 3 *(then pass/3D/3H – good
but non forcing);*

2NT- 5-8pts short hearts, both minors (5-5) opener bids as over 2S
response (above)

3C/3D- 5-8pts 6 card suit opener bids naturally (3H- strong single
suiter)

3H- 10-11pts balanced 3 card raise opener bids naturally (cue bids)

**There are some minor differences following the 2D response if the
opening bid is 1S:**

1S – 1NT

2C – 2D (ALL 9+pts (except balanced 3 card raise)

2H- either 10-15pts 5314/5305 shape responder continues *(assumes weak
opener)*

(FORCING TO 2S) 3H/4H- 5 card suit, max/min;

or 16+pts 5S 4H 2S- min, 2 spades; 3C- min (4+clubs);

(GAME FORCING)\* 3D- max 4H (3H- forcing; 3S/3NT- not H)

\**opener continues over any response 2*NT- natural, bal 11-12pts; 3S-
Hx max

3NT- max with 4 clubs (likely 2344

*ALL OTHER REBIDS BY OPENER AS AFTER 1H-1NT-2C-2D (ie. 2S- 10-13pts 5S
and 4+C; 2NT- 14-16pts 5S and 4+C; 3C/3D- 16+pts natural (5-4); 3H- 16+
5-5; 3S- 16+ strong one suiter)*

**There are also minor differences with the other responses after
1S-1NT-2C:**

2H- 4-5 card suit, 5-8pts opener passes if 5314/5224 but bids 2S if 5134

(denies 2 spades) *(now 3C/3D are to play; 2NT suggests 5D/3C)*

2NT- puppet to 3C (then Pass/3D/3H/3S- good *but non forcing)*
3C/3D/3H/3S- very strong

2S- 5-8/7pts 2/3 card support Pass- usual with 10-15pts; 2NT- puppet to
3C *(then; Pass/3D/3H/3S- good but non forcing);*

3C/3D/3H/3S- very strong

2NT- 5-8pts short spades, less than 3C/3D- to play, 3H- 5-4 16+pts, 3S-
strong

4 hearts, both minors suiter; 3NT- to play; 4C/4D- invit

3C/3D/3H\*- 5-9pts (\*8-9pts) 6 card suit opener continues naturally

3S- 10-11pts balanced 3 card raise opener continues naturally (cue bids)

## 7\. DEALING WITH INTERVENTION (over one bids)

### i) opponent makes a take-out double:

Rdbl and next TWO SUIT bids – transfer to next suit (5+ card suit)

Suit BELOW opening bid – constructive raise (usually 3 card support)

*(opener completes transfer with all minimums; NT- natural; rebid/new
suit/raise- natural, non min)*

1NT- natural 6-9pts

*(opener continues naturally)*

Raises- weak, obstructive

Jump in new suit- fit jump, constructive (at least 5-4)

*(opener continues naturally)*

2NT- sound raise to 3+

(*normal system operates)*

Double Jump new suit- Splinter (limited)

*(opener continues naturally)*

Game Bids – natural, to play

*nb. With 10+pts and no suitable bid (support, suit) pass then
double/bid NT.*

***A similar scheme is used after a take-out double over other one level
openings***

***If the take-out double is made after a response (eg 1D (pass) 1S
(Dbl)) then opener bids as if no intervention with pass suggesting a
poor 11-13 balanced and Rdbl showing 3 card support. After a raise (eg
1H (pass) 2H (Dbl)) a Rdbl suggests a 17-18pts bal with only 4 cards in
suit opened.***

### ii) opponent overcalls at one level

Dbl - take out 6+pts ***(if overcall is 1D then Dbl PROMISES tolerance
for both majors;***

***if overcall is 1H then Dbl PROMISES 3/4 spades;***

***if overcall is 1S then Dbl PROMISES 4 hearts)***

*(opener bids naturally)*

New Suit- natural *(**if at 1 level usually 5+ card suit 6+pts; if at 2
level 5+ suit, 11+pts) ***

*(opener bids as if no intervention with cue bid strong with 3 card
support)*

1NT- natural 6-9pts

*(opener continues naturally)*

Raises- natural, obstructive raises

Cue Bid- forcing, usually with 3 card support

*(opener makes most descriptive bid available)*

2NT- sound raise to at least 3

*(sequences natural)*

Jump New Suit- fit jumps (at least 5-4), constructive

*(sequences natural)*

Jump Cue Bid- Splinter raise

Game Bids – to play

**If overcall is after response (eg 1D (pass) 1H (1S)) then opener bids
as normal with Dbl showing 3 card support, pass suggesting a minimum, a
cue bid showing a strong hand with no obvious alternative available. (nb
Support doubles apply later (eg by opener after 1D (1H) 1S (2H) )**

The general scheme if opponents intervene over a conventional or semi
conventional response;

eg. 1D-1NT, 1H-1NT, 1S-1NT

1C-2C\*, 1D-2D\*

1H-2NT\*, 1S-2NT\*

1H-2C\*, 1S-2C\*

If opponents Dbl then System is ON with Pass showing 11-13pts balanced;
Rdbl- 17-18pts balanced

(\* promises only 4 card suit with other system bids showing 5 card
suit)

If opponents Bid then System is OFF with pass suggesting a minimum (and
no bid available); Dbl is take-out suggesting a non-minimum and bids
natural

If opponents intervene in a game forcing sequence (eg 1D-2C, 1H-2D,
1S-2D, 1S-2H) then

After a Dbl; Pass- minimum (usually 11-13pts balanced); Rdbl- 3 card
support; Bids- as system

After a Bid; Pass- minimum (and no bid available); Dbl- take-out
suggesting a non-minimum; bids- natural

### iii) Opponent overcalls 1NT (natural)

Dbl – suggests 9+pts and no primary fit

(*If opponents pass then opener only bids with a minimum or
distributional opening. If next opponent bids then Dbl is take-out*

Raises – weak

2NT- sound raise (exposing possible psyche/off centre overcall)

New suit- non forcing 5+ card suit

**If overcall is after initial response (eg 1C (pass) 1H (1NT) then
opener bids naturally with Dbl suggesting 15+ with no fit)**

### iv) Opponent overcalls at 2 level (non jump or jump)

**Dbl** – take-out usually promising 4+ cards in an unbid major

*(opener continues naturally (cue bid shows a non minimum with no
suitable alternative)*

**New suit at 2 level** – natural, forcing for one round

(*Opener bids naturally*)

**2NT and bids up to cue bid** ***(including a raise if below cue
bid)***– show the next suit (usually a 6 card suit unless values to bid
again) *(Opener bids naturally (initially on the assumption responder
has limited 6 card suit))*

A transfer to opponents suit shows a sound raise suit

**Cue Bid** (3D)– game forcing usually with 3 card support

**Raises** – limited

**Jump New suit** – fit jump

**Jump Cue Bid** - splinter

Game bids – to play

### v) Two suited overcalls (eg Michaels, Unusual, Ghestem etc)

The scheme depends on whether 2NT is available and the number of cue
bids possible.

***eg Michaels cue bid showing both majors (2NT available; 2 cue
bids):***

Dbl – no primary support, 9+pts, potentially looking for a penalty; New
Suit (2 level) - natural 5+ card suit, forcing one round; 2H/2S – values
in suit bid with 3 card support; Bids up to raise – transfer (if to
raise shows a sound raise); Raises – limited; 3H/3S - Splinter raise;
Jumps in other minor – fit jump; (4H/4S)/4NT - (Exclusion) Blackwood

***Eg Michaels cuebid showing other major and an (unspecified) minor
(2NT available; 1 cue bid)***

Dbl – no primary support, 9+pts, potentially looking for a penalty; Cue
bid (overcallers major) – forcing with 3 card support; 2NT and bids up
to raise – transfer (if to raise shows a sound raise);

Raises – limited; Jumps in a minor – fit jump; Jump cue bid – splinter
raise

***Eg Unusual 2NT showing lowest two suits (2NT – Unavailable; 2 Cue
bids)***

Dbl – no primary support, 9+pts, potentially looking for a penalty;
Raises – limited;

Lowest cue bid – 5+ card suit in unbid suit, forcing; Highest cue bid –
sound raise

New suit – natural, 5+ card suit, non forcing; Jump in New suit – fit
jump; Jump cue bid - Splinter

## 8\. INTERVENTION OVER 1NT and HIGHER BIDS

**Over 1NT:**

***Direct Position:***

**Dbl (penalties)**

Pass- requests Rdbl (opener can bid a decent 5 card suit instead) then:
*Pass – to play;* 2C- *Clubs + major; 2D- Diamonds + spades (rescue
bids)*

Rdbl – puppet to 2C with any weak long suit (*passes or bids suit*)

2C/2D/2H- rescue with suit bid and next higher *(passes or bids next
suit)*

2S- 5+ card suit willing to compete (obstructive rather than
encouraging)

2NT(C)/3C(D)/3D(H)/3H(S)- 5+ card suit guaranteeing some values (nb
3H(S)- is invitational)

3S- both minors (5-5+), invitational

**Suit at 2 level (Natural):** eg 1NT (2H)

2S (Suit at 2 level )– natural NF but competitive

Bids from 2NT to 3S are transfers (if suit available at 2 level then
transfer is at least invitational)

2NT/3D- clubs/diamonds Opener usually transfers but can bid a new suit
(values) with good

support

3D- promises 4 cards in spades *3H (cue bid) – asks for heart stop*

*(unbid major).* GF *3S- non minimum with 4 spades*

*3NT- denies 4 spades but good heart stop*

3H- spades (invitational or better) *3S- minimum*

*3NT- maximum, poor support*

*New suit- maximum (values) with support*

*4S- minimum with good support*

3S – values for 3NT but no stop *3NT- to play*

or 4 cards in an unbid major; *4C/4D- scramble, looking for fit*

3NT- natural, good stop

Dbl –take-out with values for 2NT (or better) *Pass – penalties*

*2NT- suggests no (or poor) stop minimums*

*3 Suit – usually 5 card suit (2 level may be 4)*

*Cue bid- maximum no clear bid*

*3NT- maximum with stop*

**Artificial bid at 2 level:** As for natural overcalls except;

Cue bid 2 level- take-out;

Dbl- general values, suggests defending (if a 2 level cue bid isn’t
available then Dbl is take-out)

Eg After 2C overcall showing hearts*: Dbl- values at least Hxx in hearts
suggesting a penalty; 2D/2S- natural, competitive; 2H- take-out; 2NT/3C-
transfers at least invitational; 3D- (transfer to cue bid)- 4 cards in
spades (3H now asks for stop); 3H- transfer (at least invitational
values); 3S- values for 3NT but no stop or spades; (similar structure
after a 2D overcall showing spades)*

Eg After 2C overcall showing both majors*; Dbl- values in at least one
major suggesting a penalty; 2D- natural, competitive; 2H/2S- take-out of
bid major; 2NT/3C- transfers at least invitational; 3D/3H-values for 3NT
but no major stop in next suit; 3S- values for 3NT but no major stops*

Eg After 2D overcall showing an unspecified major*;Dbl- general values,
balanced; 2H/2S- natural, at least competitive; 2NT/3C/3D\*/3H\*-
transfers (\*at least invitational), 3S- values for 3NT but no stops*

**Suit at 3 level**: Dbl- take-out; suit- natural (F)

> ***Indirect Position:***

**Over 1NT-2C: Dbl -**

Pass – length (4+) in clubs suggests playing there *Pass- \>Hx/xxx;
Rdbl- xx; 2D- both majors*

*2H/2S- show other major*

Rdbl – promises a club stop *2D- both majors; 2H/2S- show OTHER major*

2D/2H- as if no intervention but denies a club stop;

2S and higher – as if no intervention

**Over 1NT-2D (or 1NT-2H):**

**Dbl** –

Pass – length (4+) in suit suggests playing there;

Complete transfer – poor support (\<xxx/Hx)

Rdbl – \>Hxx support; higher bids – as if no intervention (good support)

**Over 1NT**-**2S:**

**Dbl** –

Pass – length (4+) in spades suggests playing there

Rdbl- PROMISES a spade stop (now 3C – weak)

> 2NT/3C- as if no intervention but denies a spade stop

***After partner passes***:

**1NT (p) p (Dbl) –** Opener can Rdbl with a good 5 card suit (responder
passes or puppets with 2C)

**1NT (p) p (bid) –** Opener can Dbl for take-out with a maximum

**Over 2C:** *(basic principle is opener is assumed to be 19-21pts bal)*

Opponent Dbls:

Pass – 0-4pts no long suit (*opener now passes/dbls with 19-21pts bal;
2NT- 25-28pts; suit- natural (GF))*

Rdbl – requests opener bids 2D if 19-21pts bal (*responder now bids
pass/2H/2S/3C- to play; 2NT- minors)*

if opener is stronger he bids as normal (2NT- 25-28pts bal), New suit-
natural, GF)

2H/2S/2NT(C)/3C(D)- Transfers with a decent 5+ card suit and 5+pts
(*opener completes transfer if 19-21 bal*)

3D(H)/3H(S)/3S(C)/3NT(D)- good 6 card suit headed by 2 top hons

> 2D- 5+pts usually balanced *(opener continues naturally (2NT is either
> 19-21 or 25-28pts bal))*

Opponents overcall:

> ***methods are essentially the same as after intervention over 1NT
> (Rubensohl)***

Pass- 0-4pts without a long suit (*opener now passes/dbls with 19-21pts
bal; 2NT- 25-28pts; suit- natural (GF))*

Dbl- 5+ general values (*opener continues naturally)*

Suit at 2 level- natural, 5 card suit, weak

2NT and bids up to and including 3S- Rubensohl (transfer style) *(with
19-21pts opener completes transfer)*

opponents bid at higher level: Essentially natural (responder should bid
with any hand worth a game try)

**Over 2D:** *(basic principle is assumed to be weak with hearts)*

Opponent Dbls:

Pass- prepared to play in D

Rdbl – requests opener (if weak with hearts) bids 2H *(responder now
passes/2S/3C- to play; 2NT- minors)*

2H- promises heart tolerance (\>Hx/xxx)

> 2S- good suit, forcing

3C/3D- natural with at least competitive values *(opener bids as if no
intervention)*

3H- obstructive raise in H (*assumes opener has weak 2 in H)*

*to cue bid good 2 suiter same colour); 4S/4NT- good 2 suiter same
rank/odd)*

2NT- asking (as no intervention)

**Over 2H:**

Opponent Dbls:

Rdbl – requests opener bids 2S (*opener now passes; 2NT- both minors;
3C/3D- to play)*

All other bids retain their usual meaning (*nb 2S- promises spade
tolerance (\>Hxx))*

**Over 2S:**

Opponent Dbls:

Rdbl – requests opener bids 2NT (*all responders bids now are to play)*

3C/3D/3H- natural with at least competitive values *(opener bids
naturally)*

3S- obstructive raise

2NT- asking (as no intervention)

**Over 2NT:**

Opponent Dbls:

Rdbl- requests opener bids better minor *(opener now passes; bids 3H/3S-
to play)*

All other bids retain their usual meaning *(nb Pass is to play; 3C/3D-
are definite preference)*

> NB In each case above (ie over 2D/2H/2S/2NT) if Opponent bids a suit:

Dbl- penalties; all other bids natural

**HIGHER BIDS (pre-empts):**

Intervention is dealt with naturally (Dbl/Rdbl both suggest penalties –
*if opener has a “stronger” than expected preempt he may make an
“action” double)*

## 9\. OVERCALL SCHEME:

a) **SIMPLE OVERCALL – 7+pts, usually a 5+ card suit at 1 level and 6+
card suit at 2 level**

*Responses: 1NT- natural; New Suit- natural, forcing; Cue Bid- usually
sound 3 card raise (after 2m overcall cue bid may look for major (2NT by
overcaller is max, no M); 2NT- sound 4 card raise\* (\* if the overcall
is at the 2 level 2NT is natural), Raises- obstructive; Jump New Suit-
fit jump*

*Support Dbls/Rdbls are used in competitive auctions.*

**b) TAKE-OUT DOUBLE – 10+pts if minimum will have at least tolerance
for all unbid suits**

**may also be the first action on very strong hands**

*Responses: New Suit- natural, 0-8pts; 1NT- natural, 5-9pts; Cue Bid-
9+pts, forcing one round, either playable in 2 suits or strong (GF);
Jump New Suit- 8-11pts natural (usually 5+ card suit at 3 level); 2NT-
10-12pts natural*

*(*doubler continues if strong; Suit- natural; Cue Bid- game forcing;
Raises- natural, non minimum; NT- natural (1NT- 15-17pts; 2NT-
20-22pts))

*In competitive auctions;*

*Responsive Dbls - usually 9+pts playable in more than one suit (if
contains an unbid major the suit will be poor)in competitive auctions
(nb a Dbl of a new suit/1NT is penalties)*

*eg (1H) Dbl (2H) Dbl (responsive often based on the minors)*

*Dbler now bids; New Suit- lowest suit, minimum; 2NT- most 16+pt hands;
Cue bid- strong three suiter*

**c) 1NT- 17-20pts usually balanced with a stop**

*Responses – same sequences is over an opening 1NT although any bid
normally showing length in the opponents suit now promises a pure 3
suiter (4441/5440) in the other suits*

**d) Cue Bid/2NT- promise two suiters, 5-5+ (Cue bid- majors or other
major + either minor; 2NT- minors or other minor + either major).
Usually weak or very strong**

*Responses (over Cue bid): Preference/raises- obstructive; 2NT- relay;
New Suit- natural, forcing*

*(over 2NT): Cue Bid- initially asks for major (may be strong); New
Suit- natural, forcing*

**e) Jump/Double Jump Overcalls – weak, pre-emptive**

**f) Jump Cue Bid- asks for a stop (usually promises a solid suit)** *nb
a jump to 3NT shows a solid suit +stops*

**g) Double Jump Cue Bid- very good major (solid suit plus outside
controls/values)**

***Changes in Protective Position (eg. (1X) p (p) ?)***

***1NT- 10-14pts (**responses as over 1NT)*

***2NT- 18-20pts** (responses as over 2NT)*

***Jump Overcalls-** intermediate*

***Cue Bid-** weak take out*

*(other overcalls retain the same meaning but may be limited if passed
originally)*

***Changes in 4<sup>th</sup> position (eg (1X) p (1Y) ?):***

***Cue Bid (2X)/2NT – weak two suiters (longer in higher ranking/lower
ranking suit)***

***Cue Bid (2Y)- natural, good suit***

(other overcalls retain the same meaning)

***Reopening bids (eg (1Y) 2X (2Y) p (p) ?) :***

***Dbl/2NT- take-out with emphasis on higher/lower suit (eg 6-4
shape)***

*(other bids natural)*

## 10\. SPECIALISED DEFENCES:

### a) OVER 1NT (any range)

**Double- penalties (in principle)**

*partner only removes the double if weak (0-5pts) or distributional
(2NT-two suited; 3 level- good 6+suit)*

*If the opponents “escape” to a minor or Rdbl then: Pass- forcing; suit
bid- weak; Dbl- take out*

*If the opponents “escape” to a major then: Pass- weak; Dbl- take out;
Bids of 2NT to 3S Rubensohl*

**2C- either both majors or diamonds**

*partner bids to the limit of potential fit; 2NT- relay (3C-majors, 3D-
diamonds, min; 3H/3S/3NT(C)- diamonds, max with feature)*

**2D- either major (single suiter in principle) or both minors**

*partner* *bids 2H/2S- to play opposite major; 2NT- relay (3C/3H- H
(max/min); 3D/3S- S (max/min); 3NT-C+D)*

**2H/2S- major plus minor (minor often better/longer)**

*partner bids naturally; 2NT- initially asks for minor*

**2NT- sound overcall in clubs**

*partner bids naturally; 3C- to playable*

*nb. The same defence operates in 4<sup>th</sup> position but by a
passed hand; Dbl- either both majors or a minor; 2C- clubs and another
suit; 2D- D+ a major; 2H/2S- bid major* (nb. Bids are “limited
(shape/strength))

*In the indirect position (eg over STAYMAN or TRANSFER) Dbl- shows suit
bid; Cue Bid- (if available) take-out; 2NT- 2 suited; New suit- natural;
(Pass initially with strong hands then bid as appropriate)*

### b) STRONG CLUB (including 2 way openings eg Polish)

**Dbl- three suited (promises 3+spades)** *nb. Over a Polish/2 way club
is normal take-out*

**1D- either sound overcall in HEARTS or weak/very strong BLACK two
suiter**

**1H- either sound overcall in SPADES or weak/very strong MINOR two
suiter**

**1S- either sound overcall in CLUBS or weak/very strong RED two
suiter**

**1NT- either sound overcall in DIAMONDS or weak/very strong MAJOR two
suiter**

**2C- weak CLUB+HEART two suiter**

**2D- weak DIAMOND+SPADE two suiter**

**2H/2S- weak jump overcall**

**2NT- very strong CLUB+HEART or DIAMOND+SPADE two suiter**

*(nb with strong hands pass initially then compete as appropriate)*

*In all cases responder jump bids to the limit of the fit ;2NT (relay)
is strong, forcing (3C-shows weak 2 suiter (except when shown suit is
clubs (then 3D); other bids are natural (3 of shown suit is minimum);
completion of transfer is non forcing (overcaller removes to lower suit
of two suiter); 1NT is natural (assuming shown suit so overcaller
removes to lower suit of weak two suiter); New suit (including “raise”)
is natural, forcing*

NB. The same basic defence is used after a 2C(strong) opener; a strong
1D opener\* or after 1C/2C-1D/2D\* (\* Dbl now shows hearts or black
suits (ie there is NO take out bid))

### c) SHORT MINOR (could be less than 3)

**Double and bids up to cue bid – show the NEXT suit up *(****responder
bids as if overcall in suit shown*

*nb no cue bid is available as 2 of short minor is natural, forcing)*

**1NT- 17-20pts balanced** *(responder bids as usual over 1NT (transfers
to possible short suit are natural)*

**CUE BID- both majors** *(as normal)*

**2NT- both minors** *(as normal)*

**JUMP OVERCALLS (all suits)- weak**

*nb. with a normal take-out double of the minor pass initially and take
appropriate action next round*

### d) TWO SUITED OPENERS

**eg. Lucas 2 bids –** treat as a weak 2 bid (Dbl- take out; Suit-
natural; 2NT- natural; Cue bid- both minors; 4C/4D- bid minor plus other
major)

**eg. Major 2 suiter (eg 2H- majors)-** Dbl- 4+spades; 2S- minor suit
take-out; 2NT- natural; 3C/3D- natural

**eg 2NT (minors)-** Dbl- take-out (usually bal); 3C(H)/3D(S)- take out
with better M; 3H/3S- natural

### e) MULTI 2D

**Double – either balanced 13-16 or 20-22pts or strong minor**
*(Lebensohl style responses assuming 13-16 bal)*

**2H/2S/3C/3D/3H/3S- natural (***3H/3S show good single suiters)*

**2NT- 17-20pts balanced** *(normal sequences after a 2NT bid)*

***Holding a 2 or 3 suited hand pass initially then; Dbl- take out; 2NT-
minors; 3C/3D- minor plus major (probably 5/6-4); other major- this
major plus a minor***

*nb. In the indirect position (eg (2D) p (2H/2S) ? defence is as if a
weak 2 in the major bid had been opened*

### f) WEAK 2

**Double – take out** *(Lebensohl style responses)*

**2NT- 15-19pts bal** *(normal sequences after a 2NT bid)*

**NEW SUIT- natural *(****natural continuations)*

**CUE BID/4C/4D- good two suiters (minors/minor+other major)**

### g) PRE-EMPTS

**Double – take-out** *(natural responses; cue bid suggests two places
to play)*

**New Suit (3 level or game) - natural** *(natural responses)*

**4C/4D – over 3M preempt – non leaping Michaels (minor bid + other
major)**

**over 3m preempt – both majors (C- equal length or longer H; D- longer
S)**

**3NT- wide range (could also have long suit)** *(4C-asks (suiter same
colour); 4D/4H\*/4S\*- min (no/bid major);*

*4NT- max (18+); 5C/5D- long suit (\*if a cue bid shows 18+with other
major); 4D/4H- transfers (\*if*

*to cue bid good 2 suiter same colour); 4S/4NT- good 2 suiter same
rank/odd)*

*(nb over a 4 level pre-empt Dbl whilst still take out promises some
defence; 4NT- suggests a 2 suiter)*

**Defence to other specialised openings follow similar schemes.**

[Home](../index.md)
